---
title: grasping with the hand and mind
author: otl aicher
date: 1987
---

the relationship between thinking and body is so close that what
happens in the mind is often described in the language of the
hands. mind is often seated less in transcendence than in the
hand. because the hand can grasp, thought can also grasp. because our
hand can take hold of something our heads can take hold of it as
well. because the hand can present, thinking can represent. because
the hand can lay things down, thinking can lay things down as
well. and we do not just lay things down, we overlay, lay things on
top of each other. we do not just set things ﬁrmly in mind, we set
things up, a new theory for example. we do not just grasp, do not just
take hold, we take a view of things, twist them and turn them and
ﬁnally arrive at a point of view.

having grasped something mentally is not just a pictorial analogy with
physical grasping. the culture of thinking requires a culture of the
hand as a subtle, sensitive organ. if the hand can open up, if it
doesn't just work, but plays as well, if it perceives, than the mind
will open up more freely as well. the hand's plasticity is the
plasticity of thought. the concept is what is conceived.

only with the eye, with seeing, do we associate a similar abundance of
words and concepts to describe thought processes. we look through and
survey, we develop views of the world, perspectives and points of
view.

our natural languages can be evaluated archaeologically, under their
words lie the ruins of earlier relationships, earlier
developments. words conceal their own ruins.

if one understands language in this way as evidence for the way in
which the evolution of thought might have developed, then mind will be
seen only as a station on the closed loop that makes thinking, along
with the hand and the eye the station of control and comparison, in
other words evaluation. understanding, eye and hand are to be seen in
a linked circle of effectiveness.

thinking emerged from the control function in the closed loop of
making. anyone threading a needle with his hand takes the thread to
the eye of the needle with his ﬁngers. if you miss, the eye signals
the result to the brain, this passes a control order to the hand and
the closed loop can start again. action, control and conclusion are a
linked process so characteristic of everything that lives that it can
be considered deﬁned by that process.

modern thinking has started to concern itself with the laws of
thinking, of counting, of systematization and drawing conclusions in a
new way, one that is detached from the real world, abstract. this led
to the fact that we have as good as disconnected seeing and acting as
prerequisites of thinking. the algebrization of the world made us take
formulae, thought processes and logical operations for granted and
established them as a way of thinking about thinking. the mind woke up
as a mind. we can even understand mathematical laws if we understand
nothing else. the closed loop has largely been reduced to the inner
world of reason.

but is the inner world of reason the whole world?  today, when we are
stuck in the thousand culs-de-sac of this immanent reason, we are
rediscovering the eye, rediscovering the hand. we are rediscovering
the domain of making as a prerequisite of thought.

we are discovering that thinking was liberated because the human hand
was liberated. when human beings, at a certain stage of their
development, came out of the forests, their hands became superﬂuous as
catching organs. they were free, and man learned to use them for other
tasks, certainly playfully at ﬁrst, then with control, pragmatically
adapted to his new situation.

physiologically this change was clearly expressed in the development
of the opposable thumb. before it became opposable the thumb was set
parallel to the other ﬁngers, and the hand was only useful for
swinging from branch to branch: when moving hand over hand, the hand
has to be shaped like a hinge.  when the thumb is set opposite the
other four ﬁngers the hand can take hold of things, can grip: pick up
sticks and stones and do things with them. the passive catching hand
becomes an active gripping hand, an unspeciﬁc, variable instrument.

and it becomes a playing hand. we can still imagine what happened when
man at a certain stage of his development picked something up and
twisted and turned it, with a hand that was not an animal extremity,
but free to grasp and clutch; we can imagine how something like an
evaluatory insight came about here.  and now it was not just the
situation that determined man's actions, he was not only in direct
contact with his environment via instincts, but able to control
himself through his own insights.

control of the thumb in its new role required an enormous increase in
brain growth. the functions the thumb has to perform are so varied
that the organizing mass of the brain was enlarged. life outside the
forests at the same time demanded growth in communication. people
lived on the surface in small family groups. unlike antelopes they did
not have the possibility of running away, they had to defend their
existence on the spot, also regulate their continuing life in the
small group and needed to co-operate more to be able to do this.

both development of the hand and development of language needed an
organizational repertoire in the brain.

a new methodological principle was necessary to do justice to the new
situation.

the human brain consists of two halves, perhaps as a result of the
duality of arms, legs, ears, eyes. Each half of the brain controls
half of each pair of organs.  like man the brain is double. and the
two halves control the two halves of the body like brothers. the
brothers are such close colleagues that one can take over the other's
tasks.

in the course of their development there was a time when the demands
made on the brothers were too heavy. they could not manage the role of
the hand and the new communication role in harmony. appeals to nature
for, shall we say, expansion of the ﬁrm were ignored. there were no
more core memory stores.  and so the only possible option was division
of labour. the brothers decided that each would not independently do
parallel jobs, but new ones of their own.  this too is an entirely
viable principle of evolution:

instead of two halves doing the same thing analogously, each half
takes on a new task. one is the business manager and the other the
economist.

this step was of course only possible because a reserve existed. the
dual parallelism of the central nervous system, the doubling in the
interest of the validation of one part against the other contained a
niche of evolution.

was nature making a mistake here? there are theories that say there
was no other choice. even the growth of the brain to this point had a
signiﬁcant consequence. people with heads that are too large cannot be
born, the structure of the body does not permit it. the consequence is
that man comes into the world as a kind of premature birth, with a
skull that is not fully developed.

almost all animals can move in every way as soon as they come into the
world. ducks swim, birds ﬂy, young horses stand on their legs after a
day. man would have to stay in the womb for twenty months to reach
this stage of development, but would then not be capable of being
born.

and so as the skull could not be programmed to grow, meaning that
expansion of each half of the brain was not possible, only the
principle of differentiation remained. since then man has been a
living creature with an inner split. but this was in the interest of
optimizing his performance.

from the point at which this condition obtained, we are dealing with
man. this is where the difference from pre-nature lies. it quickly had
practical consequences. the new man who had come out of the forests
could use only one hand and one arm fully.  ﬁghting with wild animals,
and also preparation of food was generally possible with the right arm
only.  this left the other half of the brain free to build up a
language centre and acquire calculating thought.  loss of the usable
left hand was compensated for by a transfer of work to language and
analytical thought.  the loss this caused is not tragic. nature also
permitted a number of lefthanded people, so that social organization
of left and right is guaranteed. the degree of success is enormous,
work sharing is stimulating, not only in recent times. two separate
parts of the brain that can replace each other but take up tasks of
their own are a new evolutionary programme.

the functions of the brain, the volume of the thinkable have
increased. what is the disadvantage of being able to use only one hand
or one foot with the virtuosity needed by a fully developed body? we
have been somewhat limited in our way of moving since then.  something
over 90% of people are right-handed and can play ball games only with
their right hand. 9% are left-handed, and a very few have retained
early man's ability to use both hands and both feet with equal
virtuosity. additionally the human hand is much more developed than
that of man's forbears. they would never have been able to sew, write
or play an instrument. perhaps this acquisition of dexterity also
meant that only one hand is in a position to hammer in a nail or
direct a paintbrush. in any case reduction of the control function of
the brain has created additional scope.

as i have said, the disadvantage is that our consciousness has been
split since then. man is a split being, a being of inward as well as
outward conﬂict.  this conﬂict became greater when the different
halves of man were further differentiated, and this differentiation
began to have an effect on social organization.  we are thinkers, we
are craftsmen, we are pragmatists and we are analysts. we are
scientists and technicians.  we are semanticists and syntacticists. we
are abstract and concrete . . .

another division into two, if not a split, had already taken place in
the division that we now indiscriminately call the division between
body and mind. originally each cell controlled itself. later there was
a division between control cells and performing cells, the motor
cells. certainly body and mind are a whole and interdependent, but the
differentiation that came about also produced conﬂict and a compulsion
towards a life skill of compensation. the life story of a particular
human being is full of echoes of conﬂicts caused by differentiation of
this kind. everybody's psyche is full of scars. no life passes without
neurotic disturbances, often the painful conﬂicts of a divided human
being.

the split in our brain into two hemispheres does not yet seem
problematical to us today. so far we have managed to live with it,
also with the reduction of full bodily powers to just one side, which
essentially is the same as a slight paralysis of our hands and
feet. but the conﬂict can become important, as can the division of man
and woman, body and mind.

what will become of a computer civilization of calculating and
counting operating only digitally, replacing qualities of the living
with qualities that can be counted? replacing the living with total
technology, and experience with accountability? so overworking logical
calculation and the formalism of conclusion-drawing that no direct
insights are possible any more, like insights of use and making,
insights of eye and hand? are we not on the threshold of an age that
places calculation before appreciation?

it will probably carry little conviction to suggest a false
development of evolution immediately it has settled for a single
principle. digitalization of the world is in full swing. it has taken
things as far as technical manipulation of hereditary characteristics,
thus as far as synthetic beings.

on the other hand, the range of human experience is getting bigger
today as well. there is a hunger for perceptions derived from
experience of one's own doing, from personal intervention. people are
abandoning general programmes to realize themselves.  they are giving
up abstract idealism and looking for determination within
themselves. the more precisely and perfectly industry works, the more
people are looking for work that they produce themselves,
independently of perfection.

it is precisely those people who see rationality as a virtue who
employ it again in the physical ﬁeld of relationship of seeing and
making. it is precisely those who are concerned about the mind who are
concerned about physicality. there are signs that people want to grasp
the world again. the mind is not longer rooted in
transcendence. thinking is no longer so much formalized logic, not
digitalized calculating, but the attempt to grasp something. grasping
something, is that not the language of the hand again? do we not
really grasp only that which we can hold?

philosophy discovers use as the source of perception, logic has got
itself tangled up in paradoxes. it stands in front of black walls and
either looks for ladders to climb over them or thinks of cognition by
that which can be experienced, can be made, can be used.
